Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Now, let's go ahead and implement the final piece, which is the login functionality.
So here we will have a login screen.
So we'll have a form where we have to enter our email and password.
And once we submit those details, they will be passed on to the back end where we need to authenticate
those credentials.
And if the authentication succeeds, which means that the user has entered the right password and the
right email, then we forward the user to the my books page so that he or she can view the books that
the user has saved.
But if the authentication fails, then we take the user back to the login screen so that he or she can
enter re enter the username, the email and the password.
So that's the functionality that we are going to implement.
So the main thing that we are going to implement is from submission.
So far we haven't looked at form submission, so all we looked at was displaying a bunch of items in
a page, but we really did not do any form submission that is taking information from the user and passing
it to the to the back end.
So that is something that we will explore in this particular lecture.
So far, all the requests that are being sent from the browser are get requests, but you also know
that there is a post request we discussed about it.
So in this case we will generate a post request via a form submission.
So we will look at that and we will also look at something called less sessions, HTTP session, and
that's a very important concept.
So I'll explain what that is when we get there.
Now the first thing I want to do is so this is what we see here is all the rows from the user table
and all of the users that are five users and all of them had the password as test and we are storing
it in clear format.
All the characters are visible here and that is not good because if somebody hacks into your system
then they can grab all the passwords and hacking and using the passwords is pretty common activity on
the web.
And we hear that all the time in the news.
So we should not do this.
In fact, we should store an encrypted form of these passwords.
So for that, we use something called as a hash function, a cryptographic hash function that will take
the you the password that the user enters, let's say, during the registration time.
And that password will be encrypted using the hash function, cryptographic hash function, and that
will be stored in the password.
So you will never store a password like this, but you will always store an encrypted format.
So it's not just about hacking, but the employees of the company which is building this kind of a product,
they can look at the database and they can look at your password and they may able to misuse too.
So if you are developing a product, you should ensure that the passwords are all are always are in
encrypted format.
So let's go ahead and run a query.
So the cryptographic hash function that I'm going to use, I will show it to you later.
That's not important.
But I have already created the password and I have a query.
Let me copy that skill query.
So this is the encrypted form for test.
So for all of them, it's just the same encrypted password.
So the function, the hash function will generate the same code and make it so.
So as you can see, all of them have been updated from test to this one.
So good thing is they are encrypted and they are also irreversible, which means that somebody cannot
take this password encrypted form and cannot regenerate the original form.
It's always one way only, so you cannot regenerate the original password.
So now when we log in into the system, so we are entering the username and the password and that password
in the back end when it is sent to the back end to the subnet container.
So our servlet well servlet or the back end logic will once again encrypt that password which is in
clear format and it will compare that encrypted password with the one that is stored in the database.
That's how authentication happens.
So that's one thing.
So that's taken care of.
Now, one other thing in this particular demo that we are going to do is to have the logout link just
like the way we are logging in.
Once the user logs in, we need to also log out.
So to both our page's browser and my books, we need to add a new menu item.
So that's.
Here.
So this is the logout link.
So let me go into browse dot jsp.
And we have the navigation bar at the top.
So browse dot JSP was displaying a link my box so right beneath that let me hear it is that link is
here let me copy this here.
So we now have two links my books on logout similarly.
In my bookstore.
JSP We will have browse and the new logout link.
So this is a browse here.
And right adjacent to that we have log out.
So browse and log out in my books and in browse it is my books and log out.
So those are the two things.
Next we need to add.
A log in JSP file.
So let's hear the Trillian Web project.
So we are going to add that.
Now one thing I want to show here in the logout link is so it is also a link.
So it has an it's an anchor tag.
So once again, we are calling the get context path so that the context which is Trillian Web will be
added here and we are going to call a new URL.
Earlier we had slash bookmark, so this time it is called a slash art.
What it means is we are going to write a new controller this time just for handling all the login related
functionality, whether it is log in or registration or forgot password, which we see in websites.
So for all of those kind of functionality, we can have one separate controller and for bookmarking
we have a different controller.
So we are not implementing forgot password or registration.
We just have the login.
Or even the logout.
So for those things, you know, it can be implemented later, you can implement it if you're interested,
but we are only interested in log in and log out.
So this is the path log slash or slash log out.
And so just wanted to show you that and we will use those URL patterns.
So let's go ahead and create the log in JSP page.
So on your web and right clicking and say new and a GSP.
Log into GSP next.
The default template is good, but as you expected, I'm going to replace that with the login code that
I have.
Control, see.
Said.
Let me save it.
So everything else is same.
So this title log in here that you see here in the head is actually displayed here.
It gets displayed here.
Just wanted to show you that because I've been talking about this, but I was never showing it to you
in the in the web page.
And everything else is the same.
We have the the navigation, not the navigation, the header which displays the name.
And here is the within the body.
Here we have the form.
So this is how it is, the form tag.
And the form tag ends here.
It ends here.
And within the form tag we have a table.
But the main thing is we are we have the form itself, the email.
This is the text email, but this is the HTML tag for the text box.
It's called us type equal to text.
A name of this text box is email.
So this is what we have.
But the actual text is actually displayed outside here, right here for email.
Similarly, we have password and here the HTML tag is input, but the type will be password.
It's not text.
And with that, when we enter the password, the characters will not be visible.
So that's for security purposes.
So this type equal to password will give us that security and name is password.
So the value of these names is what we will get by invoking the request dot get parameter method.
And finally we have the submit button.
So once again it will be input.
So for all three HTML tracks it is input only input tag.
It says the type is varying.
It is either either type is password or type is submit and that's it.
And on the submit button, this is the label that goes on the submit button.
It says value equal to login.
And now let's look at the form tag.
So method is what we have.
We are saying it is post OC.
That's how we specify the HTTP method.
And if you remove this by default, it will be method equal to get and action is the destination.
Where do you want to send this data?
So request dot get context path as as usual we have it here and slash auth.
So we have this auth.
That's the URL pattern.
So we are going to define this auth in a new controller called auth controller, which we are going
to create next.
And it's going there and even for the log log out here, if you'll see here, we had auth slash logout,
whereas here it is only slash auth.
So that's the destination and this is the post.
Now if how I use get here, what happens is this email and password.
So these parameters will be appended to the to the URL just like this even this was a get request when
we were sending this information for save.
Similarly, it will be appended here like email equal to something and password equal to something.
But with post that data will not be shown in the in the address bar, but it will be sent as part of
the HTTP request itself in the message body.
I think we discussed that in the beginning lecture.
So it will be it will not be shown in the in the browser.
And that is that's good because we are sending the form details and especially if you are sending a
lot of details, if there are a lot of form parameters, then you have to use post or if you are using
some login information, if you're passing some login credentials, then you have to use post for sure.
So.
So that's about it.
So that's the log in JSP file.
And when we create that, it's always any JSP will be created under this web content folder.
Browse, dot, JSP log and my box.
Now let's go ahead and create a new controller called Auth Controller.
So let's say new this time it's going to be a servlet.
I think we can create it directly here.
Yes.
You can click on the package and we can create it there.
It stands for authentication.
So it's just some simple convention.
Some teams use that next.
Next.
So just create, do get and do post and that's it.
It's created here we will say your URL patents.
Bookmark controller can go back.
We had this, if you recall.
So we are just.
You just use that?
Time that and that's it.
So that's with this and.
So this is the do get method which we need to override.
So we'll have an F statement.
And this is for the login and this is for logout.
Let's fill out the logout later.
So we will say request.
If you go back here in.
We had this.
Because don't get sublet part.
Dot contains.
That's a log out.
And let's see.
Not contains.
Let me also save this.
I think I did not show you this one last time, if I remember, I.
I'll try to show this, but it's not that important.
It will just whatever we print here will be shown in the console of the container.
That's it.
And this is for that.
So now we need to get.
Email and password.
So request.
So this was the name of the textbox.
Now let's call a method called let's write a new method user manager because we are dealing with users,
not bookmarks.
So get instance.
Let's create a method called authenticate.
Express email.
Password.
Let's create that method.
Or to create.
Okay.
And let's.
This method written a long.
The user ID is what has to be returned if it is a valid one.
And here, let's say, written.
LOL.
So this will be user.
To indicate.
Now, we said that we need to convert this password.
Into an encrypted form.
So there is this method which I have already written.
It's called encode password.
So this is something I have.
That is written offline.
I created this class called String Util.
Now we have this package called Common Semantic Squared Util, which has all utility classes, and we
had classes like HTTP Connect Ivo Util from all the previous versions.
Added this new class called String Util.
Now in string util we will have all string related methods.
And one of the methods I added was encode your code password.
That's the only method we have.
And this encode password will take the password and will return an encoded version.
So it uses a cryptographic hash function for that.
It's called a SHA.
That's the algorithm that is used.
And you can also use other algorithms.
But let's not get into this as this is totally irrelevant to this for us here.
So I'm just calling that method.
Here it is.
User manager.
Here.
So email and within the second argument, I'm first calling this encode password and the encrypted password
is what will be passed to the authenticate method.
To the authenticate method we are passing email as well as an encrypted password.
So let's go ahead and create a method and the user double.
And I think I have that method here.
Here it is.
So this code will also be provided to you in the resources section.
So let me replace this with this.
And it's a very simple code.
Once again, we have the driver loading the connection and statement creation and we are saying select
ID from user where email is equal to email and password is equal to password.
And this is a single code because these are strings and that's it.
We are getting the statement and we are invoking this method called Execute Query.
And while we are iterating and we are just we just need the ID.
So if this returns any, any rules, which means that the email and password are correct, are there
in the database, then we are returning the corresponding ID.
Now if one of those or both of them are not there, which means that the user there is no user with
this email and password, then we will never get into this loop and we will return a minus one.
So minus one means authentication failed and any value other than that implies that the user has.
Been successfully authenticated.
So that's it.
And let's say f let's assign this to something called user ID.
And if this user ID is not equal to minus one.
Then you should forward the control to my box.
Otherwise, you should send the user back to.
You should go to the login page.
Now, if the user clicks on logout, the same thing must happen.
But if the user clicks on user ID, then we must forward it to my books.
Right?
So for that we will say bookmark slash my books.
Now here we are forwarding it to a servlet.
But here and here we are following it to JSP.
So with JSP you have to include the slash at the beginning.
For servlet, we don't need that.
So just keep that in mind.
So when you're implementing, you might make some mistake there and it might be difficult to figure
out.
So that's that.
Now, one thing is about session.
Now, here.
If you look at this.
So let's say the user has logged in, the user is viewing this page.
So he you know, the user has bookmarked this item.
That's what we can see here.
The servlet container has associated this item with the with the user and this has generated this response.
Now, if the user clicks on Browse, we need to show all the items that are not yet bookmarked right
now.
But how does the server know that the new request is coming from the same client?
Right.
So it does not know.
And that's because HTTP protocol is stateless.
So once the container generates this response, if it gets a new request, it does not know that the
request is coming from the same client.
So as soon as it generates this response, it completely forgets about the response about the client.
So the second request, it will never know that it's coming from the response.
So we need to have a way to persist that information and for that we use a HTTP session.
So in the session we will store the user ID.
So the session would be common to multiple requests coming from the same client.
And this is the same feature that is also used in e-commerce sites for let's say when you are trying
to save some items in an in an e-commerce site, let's say books.
So those books will be added to a shopping cart and finally you will be able to checkout.
So that's one example.
Or when you are accessing your email sites like Gmail or or any other sites like Amazon, they will
always keep track of of your actions.
And for that, they make use of HTTP session.
So that's what history session does and we need that.
So for that we will use another method from request object called get session.
And this would return something called.
HTTP session.
So this is unique to this particular request object.
So just keep that in mind.
I just imported the HTTP session history http session as from this package Xbox dot servlet dot http.
So that's all it is.
So that's the session object.
So it is a kind of object that is specific to this request.
And within that object we can store any data.
So we will say set attribute.
Here it is and we want to store.
The user ID that we just got from the database and we will store it here user ID.
So what the session object does is it creates a new session object.
It's just an object session and it associates that session object with something called a session ID.
And when this response is sent to the client, to the browser, it will get the session ID and the second
time it makes a new request.
Whether it is for this page or some other page, it will also pass the session ID and when the container
gets the session ID it will take the session ID and it will locate the session object.
So think of that.
The thing that the container is maintained, maintaining some kind of a hash map, but where the key
is session ID and the value is the session object.
So in the second request, when the client passes the session ID, it looks if the if there is that
session ID, if it is there, then it will grab the session object and the user can make use of that,
make use of that session object and get whatever data that the user is storing in that session object.
In this case, it is we are storing a user ID, so that's how the sessions work.
So initially, for the first time, it will create a session object and it will associate it with the
session ID and this is for a single client.
And the second and that session ID will be passed to the browser when the response is generated and
the browser in turn for any subsequent requests, the client will pass the session ID and all of that
will happen implicitly.
We don't do anything, so it happens implicitly.
And how it happens is kind of beyond explanation.
We cannot explain it here.
You would have to study separately.
It's a simple thing, but that's what it is and it uses some cookie technologies for that.
So cookies needs to be enabled for this to work.
And so generally cookies are enabled, but if they are disabled and this will not work, then but we
need to use another technique.
But generally cookies are enabled and it should be fine.
So everything is done implicitly.
We seamlessly we don't have to do anything.
The client will generate, the object will generate the session, ID will pass it to the client and
the client will in turn pass it back to the to the browser or to the server on subsequent requests.
And this session will be valid by default for 30 minutes at least on Tomcat.
So for 30 minutes, if as a client, if we are not doing any any actions, then this particular session
will expire automatically and typically you will be taken back to the login page.
Now that's it.
But we can also increase that session timeout by invoking a method called set max time interval.
It can be invoked on this method, on the session object and if you pass a minus one it means that it
is forever.
Or if you can pass other time limits instead of 30 minutes, you can set it for like few days or a few
months.
You just need to pass the value that you are interested in.
But if you pass minus one, it would be set for error and that is for this session object.
But you can also set for all of the users by doing it in the web XML.
But that's outside the scope of this discussion.
Let's not worry about it.
Now, another thing here is.
Let's just when we click on this log out, we need to also invalidate the session.
For that we'll say request dot get session.
That way, if the user clicks on the back button, so user will not be able to get back into the login
mode.
So you will say sorry.
It would be invalidated.
Here it is.
We are just training with a method here.
Also I could have said request dot get session dot set attribute, but I just wanted to show this object
separately.
So that's why we have it as two statements.
So there is no chaining there and here we are passing it to my books.
Okay, so now we need to do something in my books, which is the bookmark controller.
Here it is.
So first thing is this is.
Okay this is a it's I mean we have written it and do get but the control actually comes here to the
to post because in log into JSP that's what we are doing method is post so with this when the control
goes back to the to the container so container is going to look at slash auth this slash auth here and
it will.
You know, it will get this particular servlet because it also has slash auth and it will invoke the
service method which is inside this HTTP servlet and it will pass.
A request object and response object, and the service method will see that the request is for post,
for it's a post request, so it will invoke the due post and the do post internally it is invoking to
get.
So the control comes here and we have all of this logic and from here we are passing it to this servlet
right my box.
And once again there needs to be a post method.
It will be forwarded to the service method of this new of the bookmark controller and bookmark controller
will in turn pass it to the do post method.
But if you see we did not write the do post method here, we just have the do get.
It's just that we did not write it.
So let's go ahead and copy this whole code due post.
You can have this entire time and the bookmark controller.
You can add it here.
And that's it.
And the post is calling do get.
So this is an important thing.
Otherwise it will not work.
And here we we also need to check if the user ID, user ID is stored in the session.
Right.
We need to ensure that the session is still valid.
So what we can do for that is we will write a new F block here.
We'll say F.
So that's the first thing that we do here.
Will say request.
Dot session and within the session we had get we have this method called get attribute.
So we call that.
So if you go into controller, we were setting the attribute here, right?
We have set the attribute called user ID.
We are just getting the same attribute user ID.
And if it is not equal to null, it implies that the session is still valid.
That's it.
And we need to grab this user ID because so far we were assuming that the user is the is the user with
the value ID.
So we hardcoded certain things in our code.
So we will put this.
And get attribute actually returns an object so we need to typecast this too long so get attribute will
always return an object get parameter will return a string get attribute will return an object.
So the user is still there and we need to copy this code here.
All of that we wrote in the previous.
Demo.
That's it.
And we have.
Instead of this, we will pass user ID.
Here for the save.
We need to pass the user ID.
Okay.
Then here in my books we need to pass the user ID, which we have already done here.
Also, we need to pass.
User ID and finally for browse.
Also we need to pass user ID.
So now it is generic.
So earlier it was only for the user with the id five.
So that's it.
So we did that.
And here we need an LS block, which means that the session has expired.
In which we in which case we need to forward to the login page.
So say.
So that's about it.
So if the user is still there.
We are going to have this logic and we know that in what controller, if it is successful, if the user
is successfully authenticated, we were forwarding it to my books, which means that we will get into
this loop and we will forward the controller to my bookstore, JSP And we will forward the list of items
that the user has bookmarked, which we are getting from the model, right.
That's it.
And this is slash login here.
The log in and we are finally forwarding it.
Here.
So that's about it.
So let me just.
I think we got everything right.
Let's hope that it is right.
Export var file browse.
So I removed the earlier versions of the application, so I deleted them.
So this is going to be a new var file.
See you.
It is creating the Web apps folder.
I looked like I need to re restart the server.
It's not yet started.
So start up.
Okay.
Now let's.
Go ahead, drill your book.
There is the login.
Just be here.
This is our login page and user four.
There are four or five users we can create any of them.
Password is test and as you can see, the characters are invisible.
Click on login.
And one item has been saved here.
So going to browse now.
And we can.
Create a save a new item.
So you are taken back here.
Browse again.
Let's say this book.
Nice book.
And that's it.
So three items have been saved and two items are not yet saved.
So you can also save this book Effective Java and it gets added at the bottom here.
So that's about it.
And if you click on logout here, you're taken back to the login page.
So that's it.
So that's the project and I hope you enjoyed learning about this.
All of those were kind of lengthy lectures, but.
We have all of them here.
So this is a nice application that we have developed and you can go ahead and implement movies and web
links and whatnot.
And this is a simple application, but you can convert it into a very complex application to which can
have an entire company working on it and venture capitalists can also fund it.
There are not many products such as this one, so you can make it as sophisticated as you want and you
can also display some related items.
For example, you have saved these items.
You can show some related items here, similar kind of books with the similar kind of ratings.
So and you can also have the registration form.
So you can do a lot of good things if you want to extend this.
But this is a basic functionality.
It looks very simple, but a lot of learning went into this.
We learned about the Java technologies and before that we learned about the databases and we started
off with just object oriented concepts and we built our first version.
Then we have incorporated in terms initially we had only arrays, but then we once we have learned about
generics and collections, we incorporated, we changed those arrays into, into those collection data
structures.
Then we used input output to read the data from the files.
After that we have learned about databases and we made use of the database.
And finally, we have also learned about Java technologies and this is what we have seen.
So it looks easy, but a lot of learning went into it and we can take that VAR file and you can deploy
it on a real web server too, like an on Amazon cloud or somewhere.
And you can, you can host it on a real server also and buy a domain, domain name and you can access
that particular application.
So that's about it.
Thank you.
And I hope you enjoyed this and this should set you up and you can learn more about these technologies
and use other technologies like Spring and Hibernate, and you can use more recent technologies and
you can also incorporate JavaScript and other client side technologies and you can really expand it.
Thank you and happy coding and goodbye.